We're presently in the office of Dr. Jack
Hoblitzel in Ingleside, Texas. The date is the
29th of October, 1982, and we're just going to
discuss a little bit about his history and his past
and so forth. Let's start out, if you will, Dr.
Hoblitzel, by giving your full name and your
current address, and then we'll go on there with a
little history of your life. Current address here
is Ingleside, Texas. It's out in the country,
Route 1, Box 1122. It's on a Tyner Lane, 1225 Tyner
Lane is the street address, and we're living about
a mile out of downtown Ingleside, a small town of
about 5,000 people, and we moved over here 19...
56.
I sold a Windsor Park Animal Hospital to the two Dr.
Pigott's in 56. Moved over here and been here ever
since. All right, let's go back a little bit. Let's
go back to your birth. When were you born? I was born
in Greene, Kansas, a little town outside of Clay
Center. Kansas. Lived there till I was about four
years old, four. Moved to St. Joseph, Missouri.
Went to grade school in St. Joe for a year or two, and
then we moved to the country about five miles south
of St. Joe, Missouri. Went to a little one-room
schoolhouse where all eight grades were taught in
one room called Stony Point School. had as many as
two or three eighth graders. They'd teach every
other grade, the seventh and eighth one, eighth
one year, seventh and next, and sixth and fifth,
fourth and the third, first and second. When you
attended, what grades did you use there? I was
there from the third grade on. I think I went to
McKinley High School President McKinley.
McKinley High School, or grade school in St. Joe
and then we moved to the country. You have to say you
got the basics there. I got the basics out in the
woods, out in Stony Point.
We used to have pie suppers.
Let me shut it off. I went to Benton High School in
St. Joe, Missouri from out in the country,
commuted back and forth, lived on the farm. We had
an 80 acres farm out there and graduated from high
school in 1938. I was in 4-H all my years from the
12th on. I won two trips to Chicago in the 4-H.
Ordinarily, you only win one to get to go to the
International at Chicago. I won a trip in 1935, and
my sister won one in 36, and then I won one in 37, I
think it was, my second one, which was very unusual
in that you only win one. And I graduated from high
school in Benton, high school in 38, I immediately
went to North Carolina, Gastonia, North Carolina
to work for my uncle, Dr. Spring, and Dr. Ross had a
hospital in Gastonia. I worked there as a chemical
boy. Dr. Spring graduated from Veterinary
Medicine at Kansas State. Kansas State. I think
his graduation year was 32.
I'm not sure. During the Depression. Thirty-two?
Thirty, thirty-two. He graduated a long time ago,
all right. He was in Gastonia. Yeah, he was in
Gastonia at the time with, in practice with Dr.
Ross and while I was, I worked for him for a year and
came back home and started into junior college.
making my pre-vet schooling in the junior college
at home. This is in St. Joe. In St. Joe. In the
meantime, the war broke out. I worked on the NYA and
attended college and tried to make a living,
worked for Sears, Roebuck's, making a few dollars
to get through college. In the meantime, Dr.
Spring had sold out in North Carolina and moved to
Corpus Christi, Texas. Never heard of the place
before, and he just came here from North Carolina.
Yes. The St. Joseph's of Missouri was a veterinary
school, and you were acquainted with some of the
old property there. What did it look like to you at
that time? I was under Dr. Bailey. He was the old
instructor at the old St. Joe Veterinary College
when it was still in operation. The old school was
abandoned and he had about what year about what
year in the late 20s I guess uh he he bought or leased
rented I don't know how what he had the old
veterinary school as his hospital for quite some
time and I uh hung around with him quite a bit uh did
he teach clinical medicine he taught he taught in
the veterinary school and He was one of the first
men to diagnose anthrax on his own in those days,
and they told him he was crazy. Was he a
bacteriologist? He was a pretty good
bacteriologist, I believe. And he was a
clinician? Clinician for, in those days, he told
me his story about his, when he diagnosed this
anthrax and that he injected his own guinea pigs
and retrieved the organism from the guinea pigs
and had his background pretty well when the state
men told him he didn't know what he's talking
about, I guess. This was way back. Did he have, well
it must have been way back, about 1915 perhaps or
so. Yeah, it was in the early days. Yes. Did he have
anything to do with the development of the
vaccine, Carbazoo? I don't think he did. Of
course, Ab Quinn, he knew Ab Quinn real good that
started GenCell. And Quinn was pretty well, he
worked with Quinn and knew him pretty well. They
were buddies. And I think Quinn was the one that
developed the vaccine, more or less, back then.
What did you notice there in the veterinary school
the buildings they had? Well of course in those
days it was a lot of horses and large animals and
they had they had a stable in there the old school I
don't know whether it's still standing or not it's
right across from the police station in uh St. Joe
there it was right south of the the police station
uh I could go there but I haven't been by to see if the
building's still there. How many buildings were
there altogether? It was just a big brick
building. One building? With some classrooms and
upstairs and then the main veterinary part was
looked like a horse stable.
The clinic then was downstairs and the classrooms
upstairs. There was another old vet we used him on
the farm by the name of Hokenbrink. that lived,
that practiced there before Dr. Bailey took it
over. Your intersection rooms were downstairs
also for anatomy? Anatomy and everything was. In
the meantime, some other officers and stuff had
moved in, so I didn't know exactly what the
veterinary school was like. Yes. But I do know
there was, he practiced there in the old
veterinary school. But you finished then two
years in junior college, is that right, or just
one? Two years, year and a half, two years. Then you
applied at Iowa State? I applied to four different
veterinary colleges, put in my application at
Kansas State, Iowa State, Washington, and
Colorado. I had four different applications in
and this was during the war. We had declared war and
I hadn't gotten into any of the vet schools, and two
days before college opened, I received a telegram
to come to Iowa State. I had never been there
before, and I got in. I think Bernie Waters was the
man's place that I took his place in college.
Bernie
joined the Navy. and dropped out of his class and I
took his place. And then Bernie went to war. He was
from a small Iowa town, I think, and it got pretty
hot on him on draft, so he just up and joined. And
this is my story as I understand it. And then Bernie
came back and finished vet school later. But I took
his position there. in our class. Your four years
at Iowa State were rather uneventful. We had three
years at Iowa State, straight through. Yes, but it
was four years of veterinary school. Four years of
veterinary school in three years, straight
through.
Seems we rather burned out that last summer,
didn't we? We burned out all the way through. We
kept grinding our, you know, we joined it. We got to
be in the service the last 15 months, which was the
best thing that ever happened to me because I was
about to run out of money. I wondered where I was
going. You were too. Yes, I know that. You left
there and immediately you came down and joined Dr.
Spring in Corpus Christi. In Corpus Christi. We
graduated from school. They shipped us to Fort
Sheridan. Fort Sheridan
gave us transportation back to our hometown. And
in the meantime, I had purchased a car from a barber
there in Ames on Main Street, old Frank, old Buck,
the barber. I don't know whether you catch your
hair or not, but old Buck sold me that 1940 Ford, and
I drove it all the way to Texas. I picked up Dr.
Spring's wife out at Mount Hope, Kansas, and was
down here three days later. It started down with
the... It came to Corpus. Never been in the state of
Texas in my life, and started to work for Dr. Spring
in 1944, right after we graduated, as soon as we got
out of the Army. He'd already been in practice here
about five years, hadn't he? Let's see, he moved,
yeah, about three, four, let's see, 38, 39, or 40,
about 40, about four years. That was a 3500 Santa
Fe, right? Yeah, well, he bought... 4500 Santa Fe.
4100 Santa Fe. He had bought the old vet, one of the
oldest vet hospitals in Corpus. He bought out
there right by Spahn Hospital, right across the
street, and then he moved out in the country and
built that place. It was way out in the country.
Then? Then. He built Spring Hospital, had lots of
lawsuits, had to sue to get hooked up to water, and
They were going to stop him from building it. He
bought three acres out there in the country.
How could they sue him? He wasn't in the city limits
anywhere, was he? Well, it was outside the city,
but there was a water line going by there, and they
wouldn't, he had to sue them to get hooked onto the
water. They were trying to keep him from hooking
onto the water system. There was a main water line
going out of Santa Fe, out towards the cemetery
there. How did you find practice when you first
began? I've never known a slow day in my life, in my
practice time, I don't believe. We jumped in full
feet, both always had more business than we, never
looked for any business, always had more than we
needed or wanted. Could work seven days a week and
long hours. What did you feel were some of the
greatest problems you encountered when you first
began? I know ticks were bad then. Ticks were
really bad. I used to pick ticks before you had some
insecticide that would, I think about the first
one that came along that was really good was
Carson's powder that helped us out a lot. Mr.
Carson down in the valley made that powder and
shipped it all over the country. It was a lifesaver
for a long time.
Of course, Maine was real bad. We still have DDT. I
think Maine's writing as of today is worse than
I've seen it since I've been in practice. Really,
sarcoptic Maine. I think it's probably due to Not
having DDT being banned, sarcoptic mange, is one
of my big, big problems. Okay. As you got along, you
stayed at Santa Fe yourself. You bought out the
practice then, didn't you? I bought Doc Spring
out. I had Doc Spriggle came in with me, and he got
called into the service. They tried to call us
back. They called you back. They tried to call me
back and I had picked up undulant fever in the
meantime working on some cattle and they didn't
want me. So I escaped the active service due to my
undulant fever being pretty active at the time.
That was in about 1950 what? 52? When you bought out
the hospital? When I bought out the hospital? I
bought the hospital in 48, 49, I guess I'd have to go
back and look at my papers, but I think it was around
then. I know Dr. Spriggle came in and worked for me.
Dr. Botard worked for me a little while. See, he got
on the state board. Did you see that? Botard is?
Botard is on the livestock commission. Oh, he is?
They just appointed him. Oh. New appointment. I
saw it just the other day. Botard worked for me for a
little while, and Dr. Dwelley worked for us for a
while, and Dr. Norton came down from Snow Blind and
worked for a while, and let's see, there was quite a
few people worked, you know, a short time, not as a
more or less a training jumping off spot, Then what
year did you build the new hospital out at Windsor
Park? I built, I started it in 53, 52,
53. I built, I worked on it. I sold Dr. Sprigle, the
old spring hospital, and built Windsor Park, ran
it a couple years, and turn around sold it to Dr.
Pike. Moved over here in 50, 56. I bought this place
in 55 and then I ran the hospital and ran back and
forth from here and finally I decided just to I had
Dr. Paget working for me his brother Richard and
then Martin and Richard bought the place and I
moved over here and that's where I've been ever
since. Your practice has been Instead of here,
although you've always claimed you've been
semi-retired over here, what year did you move
over here to Ingleside? 56. 56. That is almost 30
years. 57. I was established, I built the hospital
in 56, 57. You've been here for 24 years. Yeah. I
came over here, was going to slow down, got
involved with a bad deal and had to keep going,
working. Well, the working hasn't hurt you any?
I've done large animal practice, quite a little
bit of large animal, and then I've kind of
gradually weaned it away and left it. What are the
biggest changes in practice that you've seen?
First of all, of course, your practice over there
in Corpus Christi was mostly small animal. What's
been the big change in practice that you've seen
from beginning to till now in small animal
practice? Well, in small animal practice, we
worked with Dr. Green, developing distemperoid
vaccine, Dr. Spring did, and he was working with
Dr. Green in developing the green method of
vaccination. I remember old virogen, three-shot
method for distemper shots, and they were given
those and not having too active an immunity.
Distemper is one thing that we don't see a lot of
like we used to. I remember the distemper ward in
North Carolina when we tried to immunize those
foxhounds for those we had a lot of foxhound people
over there that ran the whole packs of foxhounds
and I remember those distemper hounds smell them
and see them in my sleep and uh we came along when
sulfa drugs were just coming out remember doctors
sending me to the drugstore to get the maybe a dozen
pills of sulfathiazole and sulfadizine and
sulfamethazine and all of these sulfas that came
as they came out came out before we had penicillin
nobody there wasn't a penicillin to be had we
started getting a few bottles of penicillin
bootleg so to speak from a naval base when they
first the old aqueous penicillin
The vets that are graduating nowadays don't even
know what it was like to practice without these
antibiotics and all these sulfur drugs. We didn't
have them. Of course, they didn't do much good for
distemper. No. We thought they were going to do us a
little good. You know, we tried blood
transfusion. We tried making our own serum from
dogs. Anything to try to help. and we didn't have
too good a success. We used many a dose of
distemperoid direct from, from laboratories,
shipped once a week, we'd get a supply into the
hospital. You used that in treatment at that time
also? We were treated, we used two double dose of
them, we used it in every shape or form on Dr.
Green's recommendation, trying to develop some
type of protection. I have a lot of fun kidding some
of the young ones about they come in here and want to
know about this new keroside medicine. I pull out
my old file and tell them, hell, I was treating dogs
before you was born with that keroside. And they
said, oh, it's a new drug. I said, no. They said, you
want to see my file? And I grabbed this little file
over here. It's usually sitting right here on top.
I think I buried it here today. You know, this kind
of floor is a bunch of them. I grabbed this file
here, and I say, what new drug are you talking
about? We started keroside back in the late 40s.
Yeah, and I said, you want to see how long ago I
treated dogs with keroside? I said, here's a
telegram. You want to see it? See that date on it? I
said, here's the old original. I said, you want to
see when we used it? This is 18 January, 1949. 48.
Here's a letter from Letterly Laboratories in
February of 49. Here's one in October of 48. I
said, that's how long I've been treating dogs. We
started treating dogs with kerosene way back in
48. Now, this is not a new drug. It's just a
different form of it. Yes, that's right. And I
said, that's the original pamphlet, right there.
Of course, the ethylcarbamidine was used, is now
used to... Prevent it. Prevent it as a hilaricide.
At that time, we also had arsenical compounds that
we began to treat the adult worms with, and of
course, we had a lot of trouble with embolism until
we learned to keep the dogs quiet. Well, that was in
the very early 50s and the late 40s. Late 48, 49 when
that was taking place. They're still using
kerosite and lots of it. Cartworms still, still a
scourge up here in Corpus Christi, aren't they?
Oh, man. I don't think we have the, well, the ones
that are really religious and give it every day,
and they do pretty good. You're talking about the
diethylcarbamazine. Yeah, that's here. Filler
bits. You can't hardly have a bird dog up here,
unless you do it, however, because they just...
They won't last. No. See, that's distemper and
heartworms. Of course, you talked about
sarcoptic manes off and on being bad. The other
infectious hepatitis never did get to be the big
scourge they thought it would, did they? No, and we
had a dog show.
Lepto hit us one time real bad and wiped out a few.
Now I still think back sometimes I wonder whether
we didn't have something similar to Parvo.
Remember that dog show that all those high-priced
dogs died? Were you here or do you remember that? I
don't recall that. That was when? Boy that was in
40, must have been around 48, 49. There was a bench
show in Corpus Christi? They had a big dog show in
Corpus and man champion boxers and champion this
and champion that was just dropping dead and they
overnight and I don't know whether a diagnosis was
ever We had what they called Virus X back in those
days. I don't know. Do you remember Virus X? No.
Huh? No. Virus X and the Coca-Cola being the
treatment for it, vomiting. I always had it turned
over in my mind. I wondered if Parvo wasn't there
then. Parvo wasn't back there and hit us like that
because it killed them. They just collapsed, just
like this Parvo disease almost. Bloody diarrhea.
Parvo started here in around 1979. Just came in and
wiped dogs out by the thousands. What's it done now
that three years has gone by in your practice?
Mine's slowed down. I don't have too many of them. I
see one once in a while in a puppy, I think. But as far
as the major thing when it was wiping them out, it
hit hard. Oh, I'll tell you what was our biggest
thing, and I'll I don't know whether you had it, but
it was the V.E. epidemic of 1970. Yes, it came
through the valley first. Go ahead tell us about
what happened up here in Coastal Bend. V.E. hit
here in July of 1970. Seventy?
Was it?
Possibly or a little later.
71. July of 71. This
was probably our area was the hardest hit of any
area. I don't know whether the valley was hit as
hard as we were. The valley was hit very hard. We
lost probably before the vaccine was established
we probably lost half the horses. Half of your
horse population? July was red hot in here. July
11th, 10th, 20th. I'm just looking.
I lost 100 horses in my practice, which is a lot of
horses. And my daughter made this scrapbook out of
all the articles.
It's surprising how, how it came in. Here it is
right there. You see that? Yes.
You said something you didn't like quarantine?
No, I wrapped the quarantine. They, they act like
it was going to stop at the New Asia River. And they
wouldn't give us any vaccine north of the New Asia
River. Oh really? Yes. The quarantine was lapped
on and we couldn't get any vaccine. And just
because we lived on the other side of the river,
they wouldn't issue us any vaccine. We lost, I
talked to Dr., what's his name, out of King Ranch?
Morrill. Morrill? He came into my office here.
They didn't have any because they used the vaccine
early, and we didn't get the vaccine until later.
That book right there has got the whole history of
what happened here. Surprisingly enough, VWE
came through, and of course we've all vaccinated
since, but it's disappeared. But do you realize
they're still recovering the virus from
mosquitoes in the valley? Are they doing it here
too? Possibly. They caught mosquitoes around
here for a long time. I haven't seen a mosquito man
for a long time.
Well, that's very interesting that the virus is in
the mosquitoes, but... Hadn't hit the horses,
huh? A lot of vaccine and no more cases. Well, I've
vaccinated a pretty good percentage of the horses
for three or four years afterwards. Now, there may
be a population of young horses and all that just
kind of sneak back. It could hit again sometime in
the future. Looking back on your practice, you
know, we've had these viral enteritis symptoms.
of cattle. Do you really think in your mind we had
that back at the time that we graduated from school
back in the early middle 40s? What you mean BVD?
Yes. About bovine virus diarrhea? We probably
did. Didn't recognize what it was. We call them
bloody scars and passed them off as
I know I worked at feedlots when that BVD was so bad
and we had one year it looked like we had pneumonia
in cattle here that nothing phased nothing
stopped and the medication you just well pour a
bucket of water over top of them and do as much good
as the medicine did. And you were you've been
pleased with the vaccines on uh on viral enteritis
haven't you? I think it's taken care of a lot of the
problems. I'm out of that type of practice right
now. I haven't been keeping up with it, but I did for
a long time use the feedlots. I had lots of lots of
vaccine go through those feedlots and they they
controlled it pretty well by vaccinating. These
suburbanites still love their horses, don't
they? Yeah, still going horse crazy. My horse
practice suffered considerable during the VE
epidemic. When you lose a hundred horses out of an
area, it's noticeable. And it didn't have a
respect of the horses. It didn't have to be a
blooded horse. It didn't have to be a nag. When it
hit, wiped them out. You've been in veterinary
medicine now for 40 years, counting some of the
time you were in school, in the clinics. As you look
back on practice and so forth, do you have any
comment on whether or not the profession could
have done better, or that you could have done
differently, or anything like that? Or would you
think things would have proceeded almost the
same? I think it probably proceeded just about the
same.
I remember about 1940
when the investigator for the state association,
no, let me see. Yeah, he was with the state
association. It wasn't the board that he was with.
He was with the state association. And we had an old
plaque down there.